## Understanding Local Adaptation in Florida’s Staghorn Corals

Principal Investigator: Erin Chille


#### Proposal Objectives
This proposal seeks to characterize genetic population differentiation among staghorn corals from reefs spanning the Florida Keys. The PI hypothesizes that habitat variability along this transect will correspond to population structure, driven by local adaptation. A better understanding of the population structure and how it shapes adaptive potential will facilitate conservation efforts in the region going forward, as these corals are often used in reef restoration.

#### Intellectual Merit
*Strengths*
The author has chosen a major coral reef builder with considerable population genomic research available to take advantage of. The author set up the introduction to the experiment well, clearly identifying the urgency of the research regarding coral conservation and what would need to be done in the future.

*Weaknesses*
The main criticism of this proposal is that it is not specific enough. While the story is generally set up well, the proposed experimental design is minimal, and you have the room to tell us a bit more, how it’s different from previous work. Aim 2 in particular was unclear. It would have helped the panel if this section included what particular hypotheses would be tested as they relate to differences in gene ontology. In terms of methodology, one member of the panel noted that for cross-comparison with previous research, the PI might attempt using GBS the same technique used in the previous cited articles. Whether or not the method changes, it would be helpful to have a clearer rationale for the use of either method. The experimental design and explanation/justification for each step should take up most of the 5 pages of proposal because of all the detail that needs to be included.

Another criticism of this proposal is that it seems to follow up on a good deal of research in the area by Drury (several papers on Key populations in the past 5 years), reducing the novelty of the proposed research. Several possible ideas came up during the panel that might propel this proposal forward into more novel research. What if the researcher examined how gradual or abrupt population structure was across the Keys? Evidence suggests that there is not a gradual latitudinal cline, so maybe testing for isolation-by-distance (IBD) or strong regional association with a gradient in a particular environmental variable might be a fruitful avenue of research.

#### Broader Impacts
*Strengths*
The intention to involve students at different stages of their academic career is a good one. Also the idea to target a broad set of stakeholders, from students to researchers to program managers via the Coral Restoration Consortium (CRC) is well considered.

*Weaknesses*
It is always a good idea to be as concrete as possible. You did this while talking about the CRC, but what about including specific universities, student groups, scientific groups that advocate for underprivileged students. Maybe students at your own university and those from the Keys?

#### A few more notes from the panel:
-	There was confusion about the mention of the disease early in the background section, possibly not necessary.
-	Maybe re-orient work toward comparing genomics of regions with more or less diversity, what are the differences between these types of systems? In this way you’re homing in on application of our current understanding of population structure .
-	Will possibly need more sampling to implement proposed radseq methods.
-	consider adapting the graphic you’ve borrowed from Drury to overlay your proposed sampling sites. will help panel understand your experimental design but also will demonstrate that you’re not making a redundant sampling effort.
*****




## Reviewer 1
Rating: Good

*Intellectual Merit*

The project proposes to correlate environmental and habitat variables with the population structure and genetic connectivity of A. cervicornis populations in the Florida Reef Tract. It is clear that the PI has done an extensive literature review and is familiar with similar (if not exact) A. cervicornis work that has already been done in this area. This research, while interesting and certainly worth investigating, is not novel enough (to me) to warrant more funding. For example, the PI proposes to go to the exact same sites as a previous researcher (Drury et al. 2017) for the same type of sampling and retrieve environmental data from already-established long-term monitoring datasets, which sounds like a redundant effort. A more cost-efficient approach would be to utilize the sequences already generated by Drury et al. (2017) and correlate the patterns observed there with the already available environmental data. Perhaps the PI could further justify why new samples need to be taken from the exact same locations in the introduction to strengthen this aspect of the proposal.

*Broader impacts*

This project will provide internship opportunities for high school, undergraduate, and graduate students. The data will also be available online and genomic analyses will be outlined, which would be great as a teaching tool for other undergraduate institutions. This section seems fairly standard – more details about exactly which avenues for recruiting students and additional financial support for underrepresented minorities could be added here.

*Summary*

I rated this project as Good because I believe it has all of the data already available for environmental data analyses and does not provide ample enough justification for why new samples need to be taken. The research effort in A. cervicornis restoration is so strong in the Florida Keys that perhaps a consortium or collaborative effort between cited researchers and this PI should be proposed to answer questions related to the population genomics of this species.


### Reviewer 2
Rating: Good

*What is the intellectual merit of the proposed activity?*

The research  aims to finely disentangle genetic structure and diversity of the  Staghorn coral (Acropora cervicornis) populations on the Florida Reef Tract to leverage restoration efforts based on coral gardening. By better characterizing the genetic diversity found on reef patches along this region, the authors hope to capture detailed genomic patterns, hypothetically as a product of adaptive processes, to avoid outbreeding depression and maximize adaptive potential when devising restoration strategies for this highly threatened coral species. The authors will adopt a bottom-up approach to identify putatively adaptive loci, making use of population genomics methods to detect outlier loci, as well as a top-down approach with environmental association analysis in order to match habitat heterogeneity with genomic signatures.

*What are the broader impacts of the proposed activity?*

Genomic data generated during the study will be submitted to public databases as the National Center for Biotechnology Information as a Sequence Read Archive. The researcher will get their research published in an open-access journal and will make all their analyses publicly available through a GitHub repository.  Furthermore, results of this study will be socialized with restoration practitioners, managers and the overall scientific community during the Coral Restoration Consortium. Additionally, the principal investigator seeks to recruit undergraduates and local high-schoolers in under-represented groups to intern with the lab and give them the opportunity to conduct independent research and participate at the university`s scientific events.

*Summary Statement*

In summary, I rate this proposal as a good one but there is still some room for improvement or clarification by the authors with regards to the aims and methods. The first aim seeks to to identify  genome-wide differentiation due to habitat heterogeneity in the Florida Reef Tract. However, from the methods it is not clear how that habitat heterogeneity will be exactly accounted for. This is so because if the authors want to describe reef environments from long term environmental water data (temperature, salinity, pH, alkalinity and other water quality parameters) from NOAA buoys, these kind of data, although good enough to reveal some local trends, may fail to capture variation among reefs that occur at a finer scale. To complement the environmental characterization, adding physical oceanographic, geomorphology and ecological data from each reef could provide a more realistic picture of localized habitat heterogeneity. Similarly, to capture enough genome-wide markers associated with adaptation in each population the author should consider increasing their sample size as the methods to detect outlier loci rely on population data. Moreover, since the species under study is a non-model one, there might not be detailed information on gene ontology databases to assigned putatively adaptive loci to specific functions in this species. Lastly, gene ontology categories can still be too broad to dissect potential local adaptation, and this is when including more individuals in the environmental associations analysis could shed light on some adaptive correlations.



### Reviewer 3
Rating: Fair

*What is the intellectual merit of the proposed activity?*

See summary statement

*What are the broader impacts of the proposed activity?*

Broader impacts of the proposed activity:

See Summary statement

*Summary Statement*


This study is relatively vague and could very much be expanded upon. This does not state what you are testing and looking for, other than simply comparing the genetics of different populations. While that is a fair question, there needs to be specifics. How do you plan to compare them? Resilience to warming? Resistance to disease? Size? Shape? Health? There is growing work that needs to be done for coral, however, this study could use some specific questions to examine. Acropora is a reef building coral and a very popular choice in restoration efforts. However, most restoration groups tend to use local varieties that appear to be thriving despite the ever-worsening conditions. In addition, these corals tend to be broken apart and cloned which could skew the data of this study. I would suggest seeing how much of the acropora in one site is made up of one coral just cloned repeatedly. How could this affect the ecosystem? This could have potential, however, it needs to be specified to address particular questions. Otherwise you could be swimming in data. I would not fund this study due to the vagueness of the study design and aims.
