Speciation and Hybridization Discussion 4-8-19 Summary
------------------------------------------------------

Emma Strand and Matias Gomez
----------------------------

Papers discussed:

Kautt et al. (2016). Multispecies Outcomes of Sympatric Speciation after Admixture with the Source Population in Two Radiations of Nicaraguan Crater Lake Cichlids. PLOS Genetics, 12(6)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Lamichhaney et al. (2018). Rapid hybrid speciation in Darwin’s finches. Science, 359(6372), 224–228
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The general discussion started out by asking two open questions:

-   What kind of evidence did the authors rely on to assign individuals
    to species in both studies?
-   How does that evidence relate or not to the biological species
    concept?

Kautt et al. (2016) first based the identification of fish species found
in every lake on morphology but found that they could not clearly tell
species living in the crater lakes apart, which they interpreted as a
consequence of some degree of ongoing hybridization. This led them to
rely on genomic data (SNPs) to identify species and they indeed found
that some individuals from lake Xiloa had a clear genomic signature of
admixture that supported a hybrid nature. In lake Apoyo, authors found
that those morphological similar individuals actually corresponded to
four discrete genetic clusters. From this evidence, authors went for the
genetic cluster species concept instead of the biological one that
assumes reproductively isolated populations. This is why they did not
consider those morphological and genetically similar individuals from
Xiloa lake for subsequent analyses, as they would have had a confounding
impact on the phylogenetics and demographic analyses due to the inherent
difficulty to assigned them to a particular species.

Similarly, Lamichhaney et al. (2018) originally relied on morphological
evidence to assign an immigrant individual of finch to a particular
species, but phylogenetic inferences from whole genome data
unequivocally showed that it belonged to a different one. Although
authors did not explicitly state which species concept they adopted, the
fact that they found that this immigrant produced a new lineage, by
breeding with a resident finch, which had a distinct bill and song from
coexisting species, implied they used the biological species concept.
However, it needs to be reminded that the biological species concept is
somewhat problematic when studying hybrid or asexual organisms.

Regarding these two questions, someone pointed out that fitness measures
are highly derived from morphological traits that generally overlook
other biological aspects such as physiology, which oversimplifies the
multidimensional organism-environment interactions typical of biological
systems. It was also asked how come could two supposedly reproductively
isolated species interbreed, which highlights the fact that reproductive
barriers can be porous during the divergence of lineages impeding the
speciation process, or actually opening up a complete novel evolutionary
trajectory.

The class discussed whether hybridization is maladaptive or adaptive.
Hybridization could be adaptive by increasing the genetic diversity of
the population and thus allowing for the potential for more SNPs that
could lead to an advantageous trait not present in the parentals.
However, a common thought is that inbreeding leads to lower fitness and
physiological consequences. In the Lamichhaney paper, inbreeding does
not seem to have a negative effect on this population, suggesting that
hybridization was adaptive instead of maladaptive. It is possible that
for hybridization to be beneficial, the population size needs to be
greater so that a certain level of diversity and heterozygosity is
maintained. Comparatively, this paper homozygosity rapidly increased
because of the small population size. The population has been able to
carry on, but the class noticed a drop in population numbers at each
successive generation. This observation circled back to our previous
thoughts about wanting more information on the physiology of these
birds. It is possible that the inbreeding is having a negative effect on
the population and each generation is not as large or as fit as the
prior one. There is probably a “sweet spot” or happy medium between the
potentially negative effects of inbreeding and the benefits of
hybridization that allows for a population be successful after a
hybridization event. Moreover, since both studies exemplified that
speciation can take place over relatively few generations, the interplay
between rare founder events and extreme environmental conditions may
play a potent role in the ecology and evolution of species.

Regarding the Kautt paper, the class discussed whether or not this is a
case of sympatric speciation and how “pure” a scenario needs to be in
order to count as sympatric speciation. The three models from this paper
that we discussed were: 1.) sympatric speciation after a single
colonization, 2.) sympatric speciation after a secondary colonization
(admixture prior to sympatric speciation), and 3.) 2 waves of
colonization followed by admixture (secondary contact and introgressive
hybridization). The first two scenarios would display primary divergence
with gene flow, and the third would suggest secondary gene flow after an
initial period of allopatry. Most of the class thought this was a case
of sympatric speciation even though there was secondary contact, because
the multispecies outcome event happened after the secondary contact was
made. Whether this secondary founder event actually provided an extra
input of genetic variation involved in increasing reproductive isolation
is hard to address because of the difficulty in establishing causal
relationships between genetics and barriers to gene flow. One of the
main questions of this paper was addressing how necessary a geographical
barrier is for sympatric speciation and although the paper made a strong
case for the cichlid populations arising from a sympatric scenario, the
question of how critical geographic barriers are is still up for debate.

When discussing the admixture plots and phylogenetics trees Carlos made
sure that we understood how they are constructed. First of all, when
working at the population level you need multiple markers in order to
estimate the allele frequencies in each population as the Bayesian
clustering methods rely on maximizing the linkage disequilibrium among
markers to infer patterns of genetic clustering. However, when
populations have become so divergent, allele frequencies among
population stop being informative because different populations have
fixed alternative alleles or even have mutated new ones. This is when
you resort to phylogenetic methods that account for nucleotide
substitutions among populations or species to determine the splitting of
lineages. In the finch paper, the phylogenetic tree showed very short
internodal branches indicative of few genetic divergence among finch
species, whereas in the cichlid paper the phylogeny had longer branches
between species from the main lakes and species from the crater lakes
showing a longer time since divergence.

Overall, the in-class discussion compared two different methods to
analyzing the biological species concept in two separate ecosystems:
cichlid fish in neighboring lakes and a small hybrid bird population in
the Galapagos. Both papers showed a novel speciation events: a long
migration for a single male finch to start a new species on an island in
the Galapagos despite reproductive barriers that exist between bird
species, and a multispecies outcome to produce five new cichlid fish
species that all diverged at the same time. We discussed the pros and
cons of using morphological and genomic data to study a species and
populations, as well as discussed how critical a geographic barrier is
to the origin of sympatric speciation. In conclusion, these two papers
perfectly illustrated the challenges of studying biological system where
speciation is still an ongoing process.
