### Community Ecology and eDNA: In-Class Discussion Summary
#### Elaine Shen and Cassie Raker


###### Papers Discussed:
1. Boussarie G, Kiszka JJ, Mouillot D, Bonnin L, Manel S, Kulbicki M, Robbins WD, Bakker J, Juhel J-B, Vigliola L, Wangensteen OS, Mariani S (2018) Environmental DNA illuminates the dark diversity of sharks. Sci Adv. 4(5): eaap9661.

2. Sunagawa S, Coelho LP, Chaffron S, Kultima JR, Labadie K, Salazar G, Djahanschiri B, Zeller G, Mende DR, Alberti A, Cornejo-Castillo FM, Costea PI, Cruaud C, d’Ovidio F, Engelen S, Ferrera I, Gasol JM, Guidi L, Hildebrand F, Kokoszka F, Lepoivre C, Lima-Mendez G, Poulain J, Poulos BT, Royo-Llonch M, Sarmento H, Vieira-Silva S, Dimier C, Picheral M, Searson S, Kandels-Lewis S, Bowler C, de Vargas C, Gorsky G, Grimsley N, Hingamp P, Iudicone D, Jaillon O, Not F, Ogata H, Pesant S, Speich S, Stemmann L, Sullivan MB, Weissenbach J, Wincker P, Karsenti E, Raes J, Acinas SG, Bork P, Boss E, Bowler C, Follows M, Karp-Boss L, Krzic U, Reynaud EG, Sardet C, Sieracki M, Velayoudon D. 2015. Structure and function of the global ocean microbiome. Science. 348(6237): 1261359–1261359.

###### Discussion Plan:

For the final discussion of the semester, we chose to focus on the validity of the study methods presented in each paper, as well as the strength of their conclusions. We also wanted to discuss the implications of eDNA sampling strategies and how they could apply to our own research. As eDNA sampling and metabarcoding for community ecology questions is a new research method to much of the class, it was interesting to focus on the bigger picture.  

To begin the discussion, the whole class filled out a Google Sheet comparing both papers. This allowed us to clearly visualize the different goals of each study, and the different methods used. It was also a useful way to summarize the readings. Immediately apparent was the fact that even though both papers sampled eDNA from the open ocean, there were major differences between studying marine macrofauna and studying microbial communities. We then transitioned into summarizing each paper.

###### Sunagawa et al. 2015

The Sunagawa paper is actually one of five major papers published as part of the Tara Oceans Project, a global eDNA survey examining different marine microbes. Since the researchers were focusing on microbial communities for this particular paper, they had to filter out other non-target organisms (such as phytoplankton), and we discussed several ways this could be accomplished. First, they could filter out other organisms at the outset by using different filter and mesh sizes in their sampling. This is what Sunagawa et al. did in the Tara Oceans study. Another strategy could be to sequence everything in the sample, and filter out their results using R packages like phyloseq after assigning taxonomy. They could also use different primers aimed specifically at microbes. Indeed, this is likely part of why the researchers chose to focus on the 16S region, at it is specific to prokaryotes. Sunagawa et al. used shotgun sequencing, which means sequencing all the genomic material found in a sample. They mapped 16S ribosomal RNA to OTUs, or operational taxonomic units. Since they were focusing on functionality, they didn’t need as fine taxonomic resolution, and only resolved their taxonomy to phylum level. Most of their efforts were most likely focused on assembling and annotating 433 reference genomes. They also identified a core set of oceanic functions, which were independent of species or location. The team concluded that temperature was the main driver of marine microbe communities worldwide.

###### Boussarie et al. 2018

The Boussarie paper compared shark survey methods in New Caledonia, with the goal of assessing the effectiveness of eDNA sampling to pick up the dark diversity of sharks. However, the class was skeptical of their classification of “impacted” and “non-impacted” sites. These terms were very broad and loosely defined and seemed to mostly rely on each study site’s proximity to human development. One important anthropogenic driver they could have examined was fishing pressure, which could have impacted shark populations via bycatch, direct capture, or the capture of prey species. In the actual eDNA sampling, Boussarie et al. sampled sloughed off material, such as scale cells or fecal matter, as opposed to whole organisms like in the Tara Oceans study. They used amplicon sequencing, specifically Illumina MiSeq and quantitative PCR analysis. In further contrast to the Tara Oceans study, they tried to resolve their samples to species level. This was more practical, as they are much fewer species of sharks, and most of them are identified and at least partially sequenced. They did not look at function, or thoroughly explain the ecological importance of sharks and motivations for conservation. Since they were comparing eDNA sampling methods with BRUVS and UVC, they were confined to sampling coastal areas. This raises the issue of eDNA traveling in from somewhere else on ocean currents. They could resolve this by comparing their eDNA samples to sequences they know are from New Caledonia.

###### Discussion:

Our overarching question was essentially: did we buy it? Did we buy that eDNA sampling could really answer the ecological questions being asked? eDNA is a relatively new scientific technique, and scientists are still exploring the different ways it can be used. We decided that it was crucial to begin by determining what specific question each study was trying to answer.

For example, the Boussarie et al. paper (which was published in Science Advances) was largely focused on a comparison of methods. While it may have been preferable to more explicitly pair their sampling locations across methods, they did clearly show that eDNA sampling was more effective than traditional methods, even if their sampling sites were limited for the eDNA. Their rarefaction curve showed that doubling eDNA sampling efforts would only lead to the discovery of one more species, meaning that you need much less effort to find the same amount of information about local shark populations (Boussarie et al. Fig. 4). The eDNA found more “dark diversity” than traditional visual methods. However, the visual surveys did find a couple species that were not found in eDNA, which was surprising. This could be due to the fact that they only sampled eDNA for three months, and some species of sharks could be seasonal, or had low site fidelity. They did have trouble sequencing one shark (a nurse shark), which was a good reminder that taxonomic assignment is only as robust as the database chosen. While eDNA sampling did find many more species than visual surveys, the traditional methods still have various benefits. Visual surveys allow you to collect important life history data, such as health, size, and sex. You can also get a clearer picture of the health and size of the total population. In addition, when attempting to collect eDNA from pelagic species, you have to already have some idea of where to look. The Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute has developed a submarine AUV that constantly takes water samples, which could also help in sampling pelagic species. When a studying a species with the aim of conserving it in the future, it would be important to use a variety of complementary survey methods.

 Since eDNA is found throughout the water column, the class discussed the possibility of incorporating current regimes into eDNA analysis. Neither paper did this explicitly, although Boussarie et al. said that New Caledonia was a largely isolated location. It can be difficult to model where eDNA is coming from. Other studies, such as those done on larval dispersal, have modeled current regimes, so that data could be included in eDNA analysis. To make it really meaningful, you would have to also model DNA degradation, and combine both models to get a full picture of how far eDNA could travel.

We also further discussed the difference classification strategies in each paper. The Boussarie et al. paper managed to identify sharks down to the species level, while the Tara Oceans paper remained satisfied with phylum-level classification. It is much easier to ID sharks, as they are reproductively isolated and reproduce relatively infrequently, meaning their genome is also mutating at a slower rate. Bacteria, on the other hand, reproduces and mutates very quickly, and is not necessarily reproductively isolated due to lateral gene flow. There is also more functional redundancy in bacteria, so phylum-level classifications are generally sufficient. In the Tara Oceans paper, identifying too many individual species could make it harder to compare different sites. Many bacteria are unknown (Sunagawa et al. Fig. 3), so focusing on their function is more useful.

We discussed how eDNA and community ecology could be applied to our own research. Since it is relatively easy to teach people how to take a good water sample, eDNA can be a good candidate for community science. There have already been some community science projects using eDNA to study endangered salamanders. It could also be used to study larval dispersal, especially in deep water corals. This would be most useful in studying an extremely isolated population, so you could measure the maximum dispersal of the larvae. The Prada lab has also recently started an eDNA sampling project in Narragansett Bay.

Prompted by our own research, the conversation finished with a brief discussion on how to choose and design primers. In a situation where there are multiple possible primers already made, you would ideally test all of them on a few samples and determine the best ones. Using multiple primers is ideal for controlling primer bias, but you have to utilize regions that have robust databases and evolve fast enough (yet are still flanked by conserved regions). When designing your own primer, you would start by sequencing a lot of different samples in the group you are interested in (i.e. cetaceans). Then you would identify the conserved areas, and make the primers from there. It is always possible to miss something, especially if one species has a specific mutation. It is also difficult because we don’t have a lot of whole genomes, so primers tend to be built off of the most available genomic region for the group of interest. Once you have built your primer, you need to test it on a known sample to make sure that it actually amplifies the proper sequences.
